notes.md, before:

# CS 260 Notes

[My startup - Simon](https://simon.cs260.click)

## Helpful links

- [Course instruction](https://github.com/webprogramming260)
- [Canvas](https://byu.instructure.com)
- [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org)
- [Markdown Syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax)

## Git and Github repository

I've learned that using markdown to take notes in this way can help me keep a central location for all my work. Super cool!

## AWS

- My IP address is: 13.223.150.112
- The command to ssh into my server: `ssh -i [key pair file] ubuntu@13.223.150.112`
- My domain name is: [echowebprogramming.click](http://echowebprogramming.click)
- I learned:
  - how to create an AWS EC2 server instance
  - how to associate an elastic IP address to it
  - how to purchase a domain name from Route 53
  - how to use DNS records to connect my domain name to the IP address of my EC2 server

## Caddy

No problems worked just like it said in the [instruction](https://github.com/webprogramming260/.github/blob/main/profile/webServers/https/https.md).
I learned:
- how to edit the caddy file to allow https traffic and request certificates

## HTML

First HTML assignment went great. [CodePen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/VYvoxqB) is so easy to use, I can't believe I'd never heard of it before!

[HTML Input](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/JoGPdvm) assignment was also a breeze.

[HTML Media](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/JoGPZwm) assignment: I learned how to embed videos, which is pretty cool!

After the initial assignments, I created a simple html skeleton of my project with placeholders for all the technologies I will implement. Something cool that I learned is you can use a `<progress>` element to show progress in something, such as how much money has been spent in a budget category!

## CSS

[CSS Practice](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/OPMLwpW) assignment was a good introduction to what can be dome with CSS. I loved learning about doing animations! I may implement that in my startup app.

I used [this codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/MYKadzN) to play around with flex styling in CSS. I learned about flex-direction, justify-content, and align-items.

The [practice with Bootstrap](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/LEGGYBm?editors=1010) was very helpful.

In the Simon CSS part of this assignment, I learned that you can actually overwrite bootstrap, which is very interesting!

Headers and nav items are so hard to style. What I eventually ended up doing was using a combination of bootstrap and normal css. I imported bootstrap through the link tag and then used some flex attributes and text styling to get around the trickier default styles of the li elements.

I realized the recipe of the day should be in the body instead of the footer to make the footer nice and small.

When working with the budget categories, I learned about using `@media` to change the css based on the width of the screen. This made it possible to display the categories horizontally on a wider screen, and vertically on a narrower screen. I'm not sure how this will scale in the future with multiple categories though. I may need to change it later.

## React Part 1: Routing

I had fun setting up Vite and React. I only learned the basics of how to get the template app working, but I'm excited to learn more as I try to build a powerful budget app with these tools.

I used [this codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/myVOqwE) to learn about how to use state and events to change component style. [This codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/OPMbzMZ) also helped me learn about routing and having nested components.

After converting the simon app over to React, I feel like I have a little better grasp on the power of Vite, React, and routing. Following that pattern, I was able to convert my own project over. I had some issues with stylying, which I was eventually able to resolve by getting rid of/changing some parent elements that were added due to the nature of react routing.

The practice with JavaScript arrays and first class functions was fun. I learned about a very helpful built-in array method called `every`, which returns true if every item in the array makes a given predicate function return true.

I learned a little about how react useState works with [this codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/ogbwLrm). Also used [this one](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/dPGRpXB) to learn about the JS DOM.

## React Part 2: Reactivity

I learned what it means to "push state up" in React, which gives me the ability to pass variables and objects between components.

I also learned a lot about mutating objects and passing them around. I decided to use custom objects for my budgets, categories, and expenses, and it was a little tricky figuring out how to properly update them and persist them while passing them around between components. I ended up using a hook in the top-level (App) component to store the budget object, and passed it along with handlers (first-class functions) to the other components. This way, whenever anything in the budget got changed, I could create a new budget object to cause React to see the change, then persist it and pass it back down to the component that needed it.

I learned that one thing I don't like about JavaScript is the utter lack of any kind of type checking or type annotation. At first, it seems like it will give you a lot of freedom being able to create and modify objects however you want on the fly, but in my experience it ended up just causing problems that could've been avoided in a language like Java.

## JavaScript Promises and Async/Await
A simple example of using promises:
``` js
const coinToss = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    if (Math.random() > 0.1) {
      resolve(Math.random() > 0.5 ? 'heads' : 'tails');
    } else {
      reject('fell off table');
    }
  }, 10000);
});

coinToss
  .then((result) => console.log(`Coin toss result: ${result}`))
  .catch((err) => console.log(`Error: ${err}`))
  .finally(() => console.log('Toss completed'));

// OUTPUT:
//    Coin toss result: tails
//    Toss completed
```
[this codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/qEbVQXZ?editors=1010) is also a good example.

In order to avoid the lengthy syntax of promise chains, we can `await` the promise using a try/catch/finally block. `await` cannot be used unless in the top level or in an `async` function. The difference between using chains and using await is shown in the following code from the instruction:
``` js
const httpPromise = fetch('https://simon.cs260.click/api/user/me');
const jsonPromise = httpPromise.then((r) => r.json());
jsonPromise.then((j) => console.log(j));
console.log('done');

// OUTPUT: done
// OUTPUT: {email: 'bud@mail.com', authenticated: true}

const httpResponse = await fetch('https://simon.cs260.click/api/user/me');
const jsonResponse = await httpResponse.json();
console.log(jsonResponse);
console.log('done');

// OUTPUT: {email: 'bud@mail.com', authenticated: true}
// OUTPUT: done
```

## JavaScript - Fetch
The `fetch` function is a way to make requests to external endpoints via https.
```js
fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts', {
  method: 'POST',
  body: JSON.stringify({
    title: 'test title',
    body: 'test body',
    userId: 1,
  }),
  headers: {
    'Content-type': 'application/json; charset=UTF-8',
  },
})
  .then((response) => response.json())
  .then((jsonResponse) => {
    console.log(jsonResponse);
  });
```

### URL anatomy
`<scheme>://<domain name>:<port>/<path>?<parameters>#<anchor>`
- scheme: an internet protocol such as https
- domain name: includes 0 or more subdomains and a root domain (which includes the top level domain)
- port: 80 for http, 443 for https, etc.
- path: how to get to the resource
- parameters: list of key-value pairs
- anchor: a way to tell the browser to go to a specific part of the resource (such as an HTML element by ID)

### HTTP
An http request has a method, url, headers (key-value pairs), and a body. An http response has many attributes, but the most common are the code content-type, and content. Cookies can be used to keep track of state between requests.

## Startup Service
I began by making a simple service following the beginning of the Simon service instruction. However, I found that I had to use `'*path'` instead of just `'*'` when matching the path for my endpoint due to some change between Express 4 and 5 now requiring some type of named parameter for wildcards. I then added the user-related endpoints from Simon to my backend and made sure they worked.

## Midterm Study-Guide

### In the following code, what does the link element do?
	a link element links another file, such as a stylesheet or script
### In the following code,  what does a div tag do?
	a div tag can act as a separator or container for content separation or styling purposes
### In the following code, what is the difference between the #title and .grid selector?
	#title selects an element with id title, while .grid selects all elements with class grid
### In the following code, what is the difference between padding and margin?
	padding is on the inside of the border; margin on the outside
### Given this HTML and this CSS how will the images be displayed using flex?
	flex displays in a row by default, can change with things like flex-direction, align-items, and justify-content
### What does the following padding CSS do?
	modifies space inside the element (between the content and the border)
### What does the following code using arrow syntax function declaration do?
	just a first-class function
### What does the following code using map with an array output?
	map will apply a function to every item of an array, returning a new array without mutating the original
### What does the following code output using getElementByID and addEventListener?
	const btn = document.getElementById('btn');
	btn.addEventListener('click', () => console.log('Clicked!'));
### What does the following line of Javascript do using a # selector?
	matches # selector in css
### Which of the following are true? (mark all that are true about the DOM)
	The DOM represents the HTML document as a tree of objects. You can use JavaScript to access and modify
	DOM elements. Each HTML element is a node in the DOM.
### By default, the HTML span element has a default CSS display property value of: 
	inline
### How would you use CSS to change all the div elements to have a background color of red?
	div {background-color: red}
### How would you display an image with a hyperlink in HTML?
	wrap the <img> tag inside an <a> tag
### In the CSS box model, what is the ordering of the box layers starting at the inside and working out?
	content, padding, border, margin
### Given the following HTML, what CSS would you use to set the text "trouble" to green and leave the "double" text unaffected?
	div for all div elements; . for class; # for id;	
### How would you use JavaScript to select an element with the id of “byu” and change the text color of that element to green?
	document.getElementById('byu').style.color = 'green';
### What is the opening HTML tag for a paragraph, ordered list, unordered list, second level heading, first level heading, third level heading?
	<p> <ol> <ul> <h2> <h1> <h3>
### How do you declare the document type to be html?
	<!DOCTYPE html>
### What is valid javascript syntax for if, else, for, while, switch statements?
	same as Java but with things like let instead of type declarations
### What is the correct syntax for creating a javascript object?
	let myObj = {prop: val};
### Is it possible to add new properties to javascript objects?
	yes; object.newprop = val;
### If you want to include JavaScript on an HTML page, which tag do you use?
	<script src="./scripts.js">
### Given the following HTML, what JavaScript could you use to set the text "animal" to "crow" and leave the "fish" text unaffected?
	document.getElementById('animal').textContent = 'crow';
### Which of the following correctly describes JSON?
	JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a way to represent JavaScript objects as strings
### What does the console command chmod, pwd, cd, ls, vim, nano, mkdir, mv, rm, man, ssh, ps, wget, sudo  do?
	ps: process status (list of processes); wget: get content from web servers
### Which of the following console command creates a remote shell session?
	ssh, using -i to input a key if needed, and using a username and domain name to specify where you're connecting to
### Which of the following is true when the -la parameter is specified for the ls console command?
	-l: long list format; -a: display all, including hidden
### Which of the following is true for the domain name banana.fruit.bozo.click, which is the top level domain, which is a subdomain, which is a root domain?
	top-level: .click; root: bozo.click; sub: fruit.bozo.click, and banana.fruit.bozo.click;
### Is a web certificate is necessary to use HTTPS.
	yes; a web certificate is necessary
### Can a DNS A record can point to an IP address or another A record.
	no; an A record only points to an IP address
### Port 443, 80, 22 is reserved for which protocol?
	443: https; 80: http; 22: ssh;
### What will the following code using Promises output when executed?
	1 Promise.resolve('Done').then(console.log) -> 'Done'
	2 Promise.reject('Error').catch(console.error) -> 'Error'
	3 new Promise(res => setTimeout(() => res('Hi'),1000)).then(console.log) -> 'Hi' after 1s
	4 Async function returns value -> printed when awaited or .then
	5 Promise chain: Promise.resolve(2).then(x=>x*2).then(x=>x+1).then(console.log) -> 5
	6 Reject handled -> shows error via catch.

Commit message:

(service) changed frontend to use login/create/logout endpts

notes.md, after:

# CS 260 Notes

[My startup - Simon](https://simon.cs260.click)

## Helpful links

- [Course instruction](https://github.com/webprogramming260)
- [Canvas](https://byu.instructure.com)
- [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org)
- [Markdown Syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax)

## Git and Github repository

I've learned that using markdown to take notes in this way can help me keep a central location for all my work. Super cool!

## AWS

- My IP address is: 13.223.150.112
- The command to ssh into my server: `ssh -i [key pair file] ubuntu@13.223.150.112`
- My domain name is: [echowebprogramming.click](http://echowebprogramming.click)
- I learned:
  - how to create an AWS EC2 server instance
  - how to associate an elastic IP address to it
  - how to purchase a domain name from Route 53
  - how to use DNS records to connect my domain name to the IP address of my EC2 server

## Caddy

No problems worked just like it said in the [instruction](https://github.com/webprogramming260/.github/blob/main/profile/webServers/https/https.md).
I learned:
- how to edit the caddy file to allow https traffic and request certificates

## HTML

First HTML assignment went great. [CodePen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/VYvoxqB) is so easy to use, I can't believe I'd never heard of it before!

[HTML Input](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/JoGPdvm) assignment was also a breeze.

[HTML Media](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/JoGPZwm) assignment: I learned how to embed videos, which is pretty cool!

After the initial assignments, I created a simple html skeleton of my project with placeholders for all the technologies I will implement. Something cool that I learned is you can use a `<progress>` element to show progress in something, such as how much money has been spent in a budget category!

## CSS

[CSS Practice](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/OPMLwpW) assignment was a good introduction to what can be dome with CSS. I loved learning about doing animations! I may implement that in my startup app.

I used [this codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/MYKadzN) to play around with flex styling in CSS. I learned about flex-direction, justify-content, and align-items.

The [practice with Bootstrap](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/LEGGYBm?editors=1010) was very helpful.

In the Simon CSS part of this assignment, I learned that you can actually overwrite bootstrap, which is very interesting!

Headers and nav items are so hard to style. What I eventually ended up doing was using a combination of bootstrap and normal css. I imported bootstrap through the link tag and then used some flex attributes and text styling to get around the trickier default styles of the li elements.

I realized the recipe of the day should be in the body instead of the footer to make the footer nice and small.

When working with the budget categories, I learned about using `@media` to change the css based on the width of the screen. This made it possible to display the categories horizontally on a wider screen, and vertically on a narrower screen. I'm not sure how this will scale in the future with multiple categories though. I may need to change it later.

## React Part 1: Routing

I had fun setting up Vite and React. I only learned the basics of how to get the template app working, but I'm excited to learn more as I try to build a powerful budget app with these tools.

I used [this codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/myVOqwE) to learn about how to use state and events to change component style. [This codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/OPMbzMZ) also helped me learn about routing and having nested components.

After converting the simon app over to React, I feel like I have a little better grasp on the power of Vite, React, and routing. Following that pattern, I was able to convert my own project over. I had some issues with stylying, which I was eventually able to resolve by getting rid of/changing some parent elements that were added due to the nature of react routing.

The practice with JavaScript arrays and first class functions was fun. I learned about a very helpful built-in array method called `every`, which returns true if every item in the array makes a given predicate function return true.

I learned a little about how react useState works with [this codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/ogbwLrm). Also used [this one](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/dPGRpXB) to learn about the JS DOM.

## React Part 2: Reactivity

I learned what it means to "push state up" in React, which gives me the ability to pass variables and objects between components.

I also learned a lot about mutating objects and passing them around. I decided to use custom objects for my budgets, categories, and expenses, and it was a little tricky figuring out how to properly update them and persist them while passing them around between components. I ended up using a hook in the top-level (App) component to store the budget object, and passed it along with handlers (first-class functions) to the other components. This way, whenever anything in the budget got changed, I could create a new budget object to cause React to see the change, then persist it and pass it back down to the component that needed it.

I learned that one thing I don't like about JavaScript is the utter lack of any kind of type checking or type annotation. At first, it seems like it will give you a lot of freedom being able to create and modify objects however you want on the fly, but in my experience it ended up just causing problems that could've been avoided in a language like Java.

## JavaScript Promises and Async/Await
A simple example of using promises:
``` js
const coinToss = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    if (Math.random() > 0.1) {
      resolve(Math.random() > 0.5 ? 'heads' : 'tails');
    } else {
      reject('fell off table');
    }
  }, 10000);
});

coinToss
  .then((result) => console.log(`Coin toss result: ${result}`))
  .catch((err) => console.log(`Error: ${err}`))
  .finally(() => console.log('Toss completed'));

// OUTPUT:
//    Coin toss result: tails
//    Toss completed
```
[this codepen](https://codepen.io/hkamm123/pen/qEbVQXZ?editors=1010) is also a good example.

In order to avoid the lengthy syntax of promise chains, we can `await` the promise using a try/catch/finally block. `await` cannot be used unless in the top level or in an `async` function. The difference between using chains and using await is shown in the following code from the instruction:
``` js
const httpPromise = fetch('https://simon.cs260.click/api/user/me');
const jsonPromise = httpPromise.then((r) => r.json());
jsonPromise.then((j) => console.log(j));
console.log('done');

// OUTPUT: done
// OUTPUT: {email: 'bud@mail.com', authenticated: true}

const httpResponse = await fetch('https://simon.cs260.click/api/user/me');
const jsonResponse = await httpResponse.json();
console.log(jsonResponse);
console.log('done');

// OUTPUT: {email: 'bud@mail.com', authenticated: true}
// OUTPUT: done
```

## JavaScript - Fetch
The `fetch` function is a way to make requests to external endpoints via https.
```js
fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts', {
  method: 'POST',
  body: JSON.stringify({
    title: 'test title',
    body: 'test body',
    userId: 1,
  }),
  headers: {
    'Content-type': 'application/json; charset=UTF-8',
  },
})
  .then((response) => response.json())
  .then((jsonResponse) => {
    console.log(jsonResponse);
  });
```

### URL anatomy
`<scheme>://<domain name>:<port>/<path>?<parameters>#<anchor>`
- scheme: an internet protocol such as https
- domain name: includes 0 or more subdomains and a root domain (which includes the top level domain)
- port: 80 for http, 443 for https, etc.
- path: how to get to the resource
- parameters: list of key-value pairs
- anchor: a way to tell the browser to go to a specific part of the resource (such as an HTML element by ID)

### HTTP
An http request has a method, url, headers (key-value pairs), and a body. An http response has many attributes, but the most common are the code content-type, and content. Cookies can be used to keep track of state between requests.

## Startup Service
I began by making a simple service following the beginning of the Simon service instruction. However, I found that I had to use `'*path'` instead of just `'*'` when matching the path for my endpoint due to some change between Express 4 and 5 now requiring some type of named parameter for wildcards. I then added the user-related endpoints from Simon to my backend and made sure they worked. I then changed the frontend to use those endpoints instead of relying on localStorage, again following the example of Simon.

## Midterm Study-Guide

### In the following code, what does the link element do?
	a link element links another file, such as a stylesheet or script
### In the following code,  what does a div tag do?
	a div tag can act as a separator or container for content separation or styling purposes
### In the following code, what is the difference between the #title and .grid selector?
	#title selects an element with id title, while .grid selects all elements with class grid
### In the following code, what is the difference between padding and margin?
	padding is on the inside of the border; margin on the outside
### Given this HTML and this CSS how will the images be displayed using flex?
	flex displays in a row by default, can change with things like flex-direction, align-items, and justify-content
### What does the following padding CSS do?
	modifies space inside the element (between the content and the border)
### What does the following code using arrow syntax function declaration do?
	just a first-class function
### What does the following code using map with an array output?
	map will apply a function to every item of an array, returning a new array without mutating the original
### What does the following code output using getElementByID and addEventListener?
	const btn = document.getElementById('btn');
	btn.addEventListener('click', () => console.log('Clicked!'));
### What does the following line of Javascript do using a # selector?
	matches # selector in css
### Which of the following are true? (mark all that are true about the DOM)
	The DOM represents the HTML document as a tree of objects. You can use JavaScript to access and modify
	DOM elements. Each HTML element is a node in the DOM.
### By default, the HTML span element has a default CSS display property value of: 
	inline
### How would you use CSS to change all the div elements to have a background color of red?
	div {background-color: red}
### How would you display an image with a hyperlink in HTML?
	wrap the <img> tag inside an <a> tag
### In the CSS box model, what is the ordering of the box layers starting at the inside and working out?
	content, padding, border, margin
### Given the following HTML, what CSS would you use to set the text "trouble" to green and leave the "double" text unaffected?
	div for all div elements; . for class; # for id;	
### How would you use JavaScript to select an element with the id of “byu” and change the text color of that element to green?
	document.getElementById('byu').style.color = 'green';
### What is the opening HTML tag for a paragraph, ordered list, unordered list, second level heading, first level heading, third level heading?
	<p> <ol> <ul> <h2> <h1> <h3>
### How do you declare the document type to be html?
	<!DOCTYPE html>
### What is valid javascript syntax for if, else, for, while, switch statements?
	same as Java but with things like let instead of type declarations
### What is the correct syntax for creating a javascript object?
	let myObj = {prop: val};
### Is it possible to add new properties to javascript objects?
	yes; object.newprop = val;
### If you want to include JavaScript on an HTML page, which tag do you use?
	<script src="./scripts.js">
### Given the following HTML, what JavaScript could you use to set the text "animal" to "crow" and leave the "fish" text unaffected?
	document.getElementById('animal').textContent = 'crow';
### Which of the following correctly describes JSON?
	JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a way to represent JavaScript objects as strings
### What does the console command chmod, pwd, cd, ls, vim, nano, mkdir, mv, rm, man, ssh, ps, wget, sudo  do?
	ps: process status (list of processes); wget: get content from web servers
### Which of the following console command creates a remote shell session?
	ssh, using -i to input a key if needed, and using a username and domain name to specify where you're connecting to
### Which of the following is true when the -la parameter is specified for the ls console command?
	-l: long list format; -a: display all, including hidden
### Which of the following is true for the domain name banana.fruit.bozo.click, which is the top level domain, which is a subdomain, which is a root domain?
	top-level: .click; root: bozo.click; sub: fruit.bozo.click, and banana.fruit.bozo.click;
### Is a web certificate is necessary to use HTTPS.
	yes; a web certificate is necessary
### Can a DNS A record can point to an IP address or another A record.
	no; an A record only points to an IP address
### Port 443, 80, 22 is reserved for which protocol?
	443: https; 80: http; 22: ssh;
### What will the following code using Promises output when executed?
	1 Promise.resolve('Done').then(console.log) -> 'Done'
	2 Promise.reject('Error').catch(console.error) -> 'Error'
	3 new Promise(res => setTimeout(() => res('Hi'),1000)).then(console.log) -> 'Hi' after 1s
	4 Async function returns value -> printed when awaited or .then
	5 Promise chain: Promise.resolve(2).then(x=>x*2).then(x=>x+1).then(console.log) -> 5
	6 Reject handled -> shows error via catch.
